# Propeller 2 Standard Library
(this doc still needs work)

The Propeller 2 Standard Library (libp2) is provides:
- core startup code (crt0) to boot the application and new cogs
- runtime library for functions not lowered by LLVM (signed division, 64 bit operations, and floating point operations)
- propeller hardware interface
- a simple debugger interface

libp2 attempts to use as much of the standard `propeller.h` and `propeller2.h` as possible. It also provides all of the necessary startup code for booting a Propeller program compiled with the P2LLVM toolchain.

libp2 is automatically linked by `clang`/`ld.lld`. 

## Components

The main components in the library are:

- `crt0.c` provides basic start up code
- `propeller2.c` provides access to propeller hardware
- `builtins`: the runtime library (64 bit and floating point routines)
- `p2db`: Propeller 2 Debugger

## crt0

This is the basic startup and shutdown code. On boot, a one time function `__entry()` (placed at 0x00000) is run to boot the application. Note that this entry function gets overriden by global variables stored in the low hub RAM addresses. 

The entry function does two things: 
1. (optionally) enable debugging by calling hubset and enabling cog 0 debugging. See [8. Debugging](8.%20Debugging.md) for details
2. Start cog0, running the re-usable `__start()` function

### `__start()`

The `__start()` function is a re-usable cog initialization function. It performs the following:
1. Initializes the runtime library
2. If this is not cog 0:
    - load in the target function from `ptra[0]`
    - load in the function's parameter from `ptra[1]`
    - jump to the target function
3. If this is cog 0:
    - initialize ptra to the default stack (as set by the linker)
    - initialize locks, the C standard library, and global constructors
    - call `main()`
4. Main will rarely return, but if it does, the function ends by calling the global destructors and sits in a loop forever.


## propeller2

This is a bunch of macros and simple functions to control Propeller 2 hardware.

## builtins (Runtime Library)

The runtime library, a.k.a libcall functions are all in the `builtins` folder. To keep calls fast and keep these functions running fast, they are loaded into LUT ram on cog startup. **The linker is currently hardcoded** to use LUT addresses for anything considered an runtime library call by the P2 target backend. The code for these functions **must be stored starting at hub address 0x00200**. If this base address is changed, then the linker code needs to be changed as well, since it uses this base address to convert from a hub address to a LUT address.

Some functions (specifcally, the floating point and complex math ones) are too large to fit in LUT ram, so simple wrapper functions are placed in LUT ram that call the actual function that will still live in hub RAM. 

The first thing a cog should do when started is run `INIT_RTLIB` to load the runtime library code into LUT. For normal cogs started with `cogstart`, this is handled by the cog startup code. However if a native cog is started (using `_coginit`), then the all the builtin startup code is bypassed and the target function is responsible for calling `INIT_RTLIB` to load the lut. However, a native cog is not required to do this if it desires to use the LUT for something else and doesn't need the builtin routines. 

The following functions are in the RTLIB. The marked functions should be moved out of the LUT since there's no performance boost to be in the LUT:
- __ashldi3
- __ashrdi3
- __divsi3
- __floatsisf
- memcpy
- memmove
- memset
- __modsi3
- __muldi3
- __negdi2
- __subdf3
- __subsf3
- __udivdi3
- __udivmoddi4
- __umoddi3

The following are in the RTLIB as shims to to a larger function in the hub
- __adddf3
- __addsf3 
- __nedf2
- __gtdf2
- __unorddf2
- __nesf2
- __gtsf2
- __unordsf2
- __divdf3
- __divsf3
- __extendsfdf2
- __fixdfsi
- __fixsfdi
- __fixsfsi
- __fixunsdfdi
- __fixunsdfsi
- __fixunssfdi
- __fixunssfsi
- __floatdisf
- __floatsidf
- __floatundidf
- __floatundisf
- __floatunsidf
- __floatunsisf
- __lshrdi3
- __muldf3
- __mulsf3
- sqrtf
- powf
- __moddi3
- __divdi3